---
title: Short Introduction to Programming in Python
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
  - "What is Python?"
  - "Why should I learn Python?"
objectives:
  - "Describe the advantages of using programming vs. completing repetitive tasks by hand."
  - "Define the following data types in Python: strings, integers, and floats."
  - "Perform mathematical operations in Python using basic operators."
  - "Define the following as it relates to Python: lists, tuples, and dictionaries."
---

# The Basics of Python

Python is a general purpose programming language that supports rapid development
of scripts and applications.

Python's main advantages:

* Open Source software, supported by Python Software Foundation
* Available on all platforms
* It is a general-purpose programming language
* Supports multiple programming paradigms
* Very large community with a rich ecosystem of third-party packages
* interpreted language, i.e. direct execution of commands, no compilation neccessary

## Knowing your way around Anaconda and Spyder

We are going to use an interactive development enviroment a so called IDE to write and run our code, we are using [Spyder](https://spyder-ide.github.io
) which comes with [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com). Open the Anaconda Navigator (explain environments?, projects?, packages?). Under the Home tab chose Spyder.

## Getting set up

It is good practice to keep a set of related data, analyses, and text self-contained in a single folder, called the working directory. All of the scripts within this folder can then use relative paths to files that indicate where inside the project a file is located (as opposed to absolute paths, which point to where a file is on a specific computer). Working this way makes it a lot easier to move your project around on your computer and share it with others without worrying about whether or not the underlying scripts will still work.

Spyder provides a helpful set of tools to do this through its “Projects” interface, which not only creates a working directory for you but also remembers its location (allowing you to quickly navigate to it) and optionally preserves custom settings and open files to make it easier to resume work after a break. Below, we will go through the steps for creating an “Python Project” for this tutorial.

* Start Anaconda Navigator and from launch Spyder 
* Under the Projects menu, click on New project, choose New directory
* Enter a name for this new folder (or “directory”), and choose a convenient location for it. This will be your working directory for the rest of the day (e.g., ~/data-carpentry)
* Click on Create
* Under the Project Explorer tab on the left of the screen, right click, choose New and Folder and create a folder named data within your newly created working directory (e.g., ~/data-carpentry/data)

## Organizing your working directory
Using a consistent folder structure across your projects will help keep things organized, and will also make it easy to find/file things in the future. This can be especially helpful when you have multiple projects. In general, you may create directories (folders) for scripts, data, and documents.

**`data/`** Use this folder to store your raw data and intermediate datasets you may create for the need of a particular analysis. For the sake of transparency and provenance, you should always keep a copy of your raw data accessible and do as much of your data cleanup and preprocessing programmatically (i.e., with scripts, rather than manually) as possible. Separating raw data from processed data is also a good idea. For example, you could have files `data/raw/tree_survey.plot1.txt` and `...plot2.txt` kept separate from a `data/processed/tree.survey.csv` file generated by the `scripts/01.preprocess.tree_survey.py` script.
**`documents/`** This would be a place to keep outlines, drafts, and other text.
**`scripts/`** This would be the location to keep your python scripts for different analyses or plotting, and potentially a separate folder for your functions (more on that later).
You may want additional directories or subdirectories depending on your project needs, but these should form the backbone of your working directory. For this workshop, we will need a `data/` folder to store our raw data, and we will create later a `data_output/` folder when we learn how to export data as CSV files.

(add work directory graph as in R lesson)

## Interacting with Python
The basis of programming is that we write down instructions for the computer to follow, and then we tell the computer to follow those instructions. We write, or code, instructions in python because it is a common language that both the computer and we can understand. We call the instructions commands and we tell the computer to follow the instructions by executing (also called running) those commands.

There are two main ways of interacting with python: by using the console or by using script files (plain text files that contain your code). The console pane (in Spyder, the bottom right panel) is the place where commands written in the python language can be typed and executed immediately by the computer. It is also where the results will be shown for commands that have been executed. You can type commands directly into the console and press Enter to execute those commands, but they will be forgotten when you close the session. Spyder uses the [IPython](http://ipython.org) console.

Because we want our code and workflow to be reproducible, it is better to type the commands we want in the script editor, and save the script. This way, there is a complete record of what we did, and anyone (including our future selves!) can easily replicate the results on their computer.

Spyder allows you to execute commands directly from the script editor by using the run buttons on top or keyboard shortcuts. To run the entire script click `Run file` or `F5`, to run the current line click `Run selection or current line` or `F9`, other run buttons allow to run script cells or go into debug mode. When using `F9`, the command on the current line in the script (indicated by the cursor) or all of the commands in the currently selected text will be sent to the console and executed. 

At some point in your analysis you may want to check the content of a variable or the structure of an object, without necessarily keeping a record of it in your script. You can type these commands and execute them directly in the console. Spyder provides the `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `E` and `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `I` shortcuts to allow you to jump between the script and the console panes.

If python is ready to accept commands, the IPython console shows a `In [..]:` prompt with the current console line number in `[]`. If it receives a command (by typing, copy-pasting or sent from the script editor), python will try to execute it, and when ready, will show the results with an `Out [..]:` prompt and come back with a new `In [..]:` prompt to wait for new commands. 

If python is still waiting for you to enter more data because it isn’t complete yet, the console will show a `...:` prompt. It means that you haven’t finished entering a complete command. This is because you have not ‘closed’ a parenthesis or quotation, i.e. you don’t have the same number of left-parentheses as right-parentheses, or the same number of opening and closing quotation marks. When this happens, and you thought you finished typing your command, click inside the console window and press Esc; this will cancel the incomplete command and return you to the `In [..]:` prompt.

## How to learn more after the workshop?
The material we cover during this workshop will give you an initial taste of how you can use python to analyze data for your own research. However, you will need to learn more to do advanced operations such as cleaning your dataset, using statistical methods, or creating beautiful graphics. The best way to become proficient and efficient at R, as with any other tool, is to use it to address your actual research questions. As a beginner, it can feel daunting to have to write a script from scratch, and given that many people make their code available online, modifying existing code to suit your purpose might make it easier for you to get started.

## Seeking help

* check under Help
* type help() in console
* [python documentation](https://www.python.org/doc/)
* type ?object or help(object) to get information about an object

Finally, a generic Google or internet search “python <task>” will often either send you to the appropriate package documentation or a helpful forum where someone else has already asked your question.

I am stuck… I get an error message that I don’t understand
Start by googling the error message. However, this doesn’t always work very well because often, package developers rely on the error catching provided by python. You end up with general error messages that might not be very helpful to diagnose a problem (e.g. “subscript out of bounds”). If the message is very generic, you might also include the name of the function or package you’re using in your query.

However, you should check Stack Overflow. Search using the [python] tag. Most questions have already been answered, but the challenge is to use the right words in the search to find the answers: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/python

## Asking for help
The key to receiving help from someone is for them to rapidly grasp your problem. You should make it as easy as possible to pinpoint where the issue might be.

Try to use the correct words to describe your problem. For instance, a package is not the same thing as a library. Most people will understand what you meant, but others have really strong feelings about the difference in meaning. The key point is that it can make things confusing for people trying to help you. Be as precise as possible when describing your problem.

If possible, try to reduce what doesn’t work to a simple reproducible example. If you can reproduce the problem using a very small data frame instead of your 50,000 rows and 10,000 columns one, provide the small one with the description of your problem. When appropriate, try to generalize what you are doing so even people who are not in your field can understand the question. For instance instead of using a subset of your real dataset, create a small (3 columns, 5 rows) generic one.

## Where to ask for help?
* The person sitting next to you during the workshop. Don’t hesitate to talk to your neighbor during the workshop, compare your answers, and ask for help. You might also be interested in organizing regular meetings following the workshop to keep learning from each other.
* Your friendly colleagues: if you know someone with more experience than you, they might be able and willing to help you.
* Stack Overflow: if your question hasn’t been answered before and is well crafted, chances are you will get an answer in less than 5 min. Remember to follow their guidelines on how to ask a good question.
* python mailing lists [https://www.python.org/community/lists/] 

## More resources
[PyPI - the Python Package Index](https://pypi.python.org/pypi)

## Introduction to Python built-in data types

### Strings, integers and floats

One of the most basic things we can do in Python is assign values to variables:

```python
text = "Data Carpentry" #an example of a string
number = 42 #an example of an integer
pi_value = 3.1415 #an example of a float
```

Here we've assigned data to the variables `text`, `number` and `pi_value`,
using the assignment operator `=`. To review the value of a variable, we
can type the name of the variable into the interpreter and press `Enter`:

```python
>>> text
"Data Carpentry"
```

Everything in Python has a type. To get the type of something, we can pass it
to the built-in function `type`:

```python
>>> type(text)
<class 'str'>
>>> type(number)
<class 'int'>
>>> type(6.02)
<class 'float'>
```

The variable `text` is of type `str`, short for "string". Strings hold
sequences of characters, which can be letters, numbers, punctuation
or more exotic forms of text (even emoji!).

We can also see the value of something using another built-in function, `print`:

```python
>>> print(text)
Data Carpentry
>>> print(11)
11
```

This may seem redundant, but in fact it's the only way to display output in a script:

*example.py*
```python
# A Python script file
# Comments in Python start with #
# The next line assigns the string "Data Carpentry" to the variable "text".
text = "Data Carpentry"
# The next line does nothing!
text
# The next line uses the print function to print out the value we assigned to "text"
print(text)
```
*Running the script*
```bash
$ python example.py
Data Carpentry
```

Notice that "Data Carpentry" is printed only once. 

**Tip**: `print` and `type` are built-in functions in Python. Later in this
lesson, we will introduce methods and user-defined functions. The Python
documentation is excellent for reference on the differences between them.

### Operators

We can perform mathematical calculations in Python using the basic operators
 `+, -, /, *, %`:

```python
>>> 2 + 2   #  addition
4
>>> 6 * 7   #  multiplication
42
>>> 2 ** 16  # power
65536
>>> 13 % 5  # modulo
3
```

We can also use comparison and logic operators:
`<, >, ==, !=, <=, >=` and statements of identity such as
`and, or, not`. The data type returned by this is
called a _boolean_.


```python
>>> 3 > 4
False
>>> True and True
True
>>> True or False
True
```

## Sequential types: Lists and Tuples

### Lists

**Lists** are a common data structure to hold an ordered sequence of
elements. Each element can be accessed by an index.  Note that Python
indexes start with 0 instead of 1:

```python
>>> numbers = [1, 2, 3]
>>> numbers[0]
1
```

A `for` loop can be used to access the elements in a list or other Python data
structure one at a time:

```python
>>> for num in numbers:
...     print(num)
...
1
2
3
>>>
```

**Indentation** is very important in Python. Note that the second line in the
example above is indented. Just like three chevrons `>>>` indicate an
interactive prompt in Python, the three dots `...` are Python's prompt for
multiple lines. This is Python's way of marking a block of code. [Note: you
do not type `>>>` or `...`.]

To add elements to the end of a list, we can use the `append` method. Methods
are a way to interact with an object (a list, for example). We can invoke a
method using the dot `.` followed by the method name and a list of arguments
in parentheses. Let's look at an example using `append`:

```python
>>> numbers.append(4)
>>> print(numbers)
[1, 2, 3, 4]
>>>
```

To find out what methods are available for an
object, we can use the built-in `help` command:

```python
help(numbers)

Help on list object:

class list(object)
 |  list() -> new empty list
 |  list(iterable) -> new list initialized from iterable's items
 ...
```

### Tuples

A tuple is similar to a list in that it's an ordered sequence of elements.
However, tuples can not be changed once created (they are "immutable"). Tuples
are created by placing comma-separated values inside parentheses `()`.

```python
# tuples use parentheses
a_tuple= (1, 2, 3)
another_tuple = ('blue', 'green', 'red')
# Note: lists use square brackets
a_list = [1, 2, 3]
```

> ## Challenge - Tuples
> 1. What happens when you type `a_tuple[2]=5` vs `a_list[1]=5` ?
> 2. Type `type(a_tuple)` into python - what is the object type?
>
{: .challenge}


## Dictionaries

A **dictionary** is a container that holds pairs of objects - keys and values.

```python
>>> translation = {'one': 1, 'two': 2}
>>> translation['one']
1
```
Dictionaries work a lot like lists - except that you index them with *keys*.
You can think about a key as a name for or a unique identifier for a set of values
in the dictionary. Keys can only have particular types - they have to be
"hashable". Strings and numeric types are acceptable, but lists aren't.

```python
>>> rev = {1: 'one', 2: 'two'}
>>> rev[1]
'one'
>>> bad = {[1, 2, 3]: 3}
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'
```

In Python, a "Traceback" is an multi-line error block printed out for the
user.

To add an item to the dictionary we assign a value to a new key:

```python
>>> rev = {1: 'one', 2: 'two'}
>>> rev[3] = 'three'
>>> rev
{1: 'one', 2: 'two', 3: 'three'}
```

Using `for` loops with dictionaries is a little more complicated. We can do
this in two ways:

```python
>>> for key, value in rev.items():
...     print(key, '->', value)
...
1 -> one
2 -> two
3 -> three
```

or

```python
>>> for key in rev.keys():
...     print(key, '->', rev[key])
...
1 -> one
2 -> two
3 -> three
>>>
```

> ## Challenge - Can you do reassignment in a dictionary?
> 
> 1. First check what `rev` is right now (remember `rev` is the name of our dictionary). 
>     
>    Type:
> ```python
> >>> rev
> ```
>
> 2. Try to reassign the second value (in the *key value pair*) so that it no longer reads "two" but instead reads "apple-sauce". 
>
> 3. Now display `rev` again to see if it has changed. 
>
{: .challenge}

It is important to note that dictionaries are "unordered" and do not remember
the sequence of their items (i.e. the order in which key:value pairs were
added to the dictionary). Because of this, the order in which items are
returned from loops over dictionaries might appear random and can even change
with time.



## Functions

Defining a section of code as a function in Python is done using the `def`
keyword. For example a function that takes two arguments and returns their sum
can be defined as:

```python
def add_function(a, b):
    result = a + b
    return result

z = add_function(20, 22)
print(z)
42
```

Key points about functions are:

* definition starts with `def`
* function body is indented
* `return` keyword precedes returned value
